## Basics, Groups and Subgroups



### 

Let $m_{1}, m_{2}, \cdots, m_{k}$ be positive integers and $d>0$ the greatest common divisor of $m_{1}, m_{2}, \cdots, m_{k}$. Show that there exist integers $x_{1}, x_{2}, \cdots, x_{k}$ such that

$$
d=x_{1} m_{1}+x_{2} m_{2}+\cdots+x_{k} m_{k}
$$


### 1b 2013

Give an example of an infinite group in which every element has finite order.

### 1a 2012

1. (a) How many elements of order 2 are there in the group of order 16 generated by $a$ and $b$ such that the order of $a$ is 8 , the order of $b$ is 2 and $b a b^{-1}=a^{-1}$.

### 1a 2011

1. (a) Show that the set

$$
\begin{aligned}
& G=\left\{f_{1}, f_{2}, f_{3}, f_{4}, f_{5}, f_{6}\right\} \\
& \text { of six transformations on the set of Complex } \\
& \text { numbers defined by } \\
& f_{1}(z)=z, f_{2}(z)=1-z \\
& f_{3}(z)=\frac{z}{(z-1)}, f_{4}(z)=\frac{1}{z} \\
& f_{5}(z)=\frac{1}{(1-z)} \text { and } f_{6}(z)=\frac{(z-1)}{z}
\end{aligned}
$$

is a non-abelian group of order 6 w.r.t. composition of mappings. $\&$

### 4a 2011

4. (a) Let a and b be elements of a group, with $\mathrm{a}^{2}=\mathrm{e}$, $b^{6}=e$ and $a b=b^{4} a$

Find the order of $a b$, and express its inverse in each of the forms $a^{m} b^{n}$ and $b^{m} a^{n}$. 20

### 1a 2010

(a) Let $G=\mathbb{R}-\{-1\}$ be the set of all real numbers omitting -1 . Define the binary relation $*$ on $G$ by $a * b=a+b+a b$. Show $(G, *)$ is a group and it is abelian 12

### 1a 2020 IFoS

Let $p$ be a prime number. Then show that

$$
(p-1) 1+1 \equiv 0 \bmod (p)
$$

Also, find the remainder when $6^{44} \cdot(22) !+3$ is divided by 23 .

### 3a 2019 IFoS

If in the group $G, a^{5}=e, a b a^{-1}=b^{2}$ for some $a, b \in G$, find the order of $b$.

### 1a 2017 IFoS

1. (a) Prove that every group of order four is Abelian.

### 2a 2017 IFoS

2. (a) Let $G$ be the set of all real numbers except -1 and define $a * b=a+b+a b$ $\forall a, b \in G$. Examine if $G$ is an Abelian group under *.

### 1a 2016 IFoS

1.(a) Prove that the set of all bijective functions from a non-empty set $X$ onto itself is a group with respect to usual composition of functions.

### 1a 2014 IFoS

(a) If $G$ is a group in which $(a \cdot b)^{4}=a^{4} \cdot b^{4},(a \cdot b)^{5}=a^{5} \cdot b^{5}$ and $(a \cdot b)^{6}=a^{6} \cdot b^{6}$, for all $a, b \in G$, then prove that $G$ is Abelian.

### 1b 2013 IFoS

(b) Prove that if every element of a group $(G, 0)$ be its own inverse, then it is an abelian group.

### 1a 2011 IFoS

(a) Let $G$ be a group, and $x$ and $y$ be any two elements of $G$. If $y^{5}=e$ and $y x y^{-1}=x^{2}$, then show that $O(x)=31$, where $e$ is the identity element of $G$ and $x \neq e$.

### 1a 2010 IFoS

(a) Let

$$
G=\left\{\left[\begin{array}{ll}
a & a \\
a & a
\end{array}\right] \mid a \in \mathbb{R}, a \neq 0\right\}
$$

Show that ' $G$ is a group under matrix multiplication.

### 3a 2010 IFoS

(a) Show that zero and unity are only idempotents of $Z_{n}$ if $n=p^{r}$, where $p$ is a prime.


## Cyclic Groups

2 a 2020

Let $G$ be a finite cyclic group of order $n$. Then prove that $G$ has $\phi(n)$ generators (where $\phi$ is Euler's $\phi$-function).

### 2b 2016

Let $p$ be a prime number and $\mathbf{Z}_{\mathrm{p}}$ denote the additive group of integers modulo p. Show that every non-zero element of $\mathbf{Z}_{p}$ generates $\mathbf{Z}_{\mathbf{p}}$.

### 1a 2015

How many generators are there of the cyclic group $G$ of order 8 Explain.

Taking a group $\{e, a, b, c\}$ of order 4 , where $e$ is the identity, construct composition tables showing that one is cyclic while the other is not.

### 1e 2011

(e) (i) Prove that a group of Prime order is abelian.

$$
414 \text { o } 6
$$

(ii) How many generators are there of the cyclic group $(\mathrm{G}, \cdot)$ of order 8 ?

### 2a 2011

2. (a) Give an example of a group $\mathrm{G}$ in which every proper subgroup is cyclic but the group itself is not cyclic.

### 1b 2010

(b) Show that a cyclic group of order 6 is isomorphic to the product of a cyclic group of order 2 and a cyclic group of order 3. Can you generalize this? ? Justify.

### 1b 2009

(b) Determine the number of homomorphisms from the additive group $\mathbb{Z}_{15}$ to the additive group $\mathbb{Z}_{10}$. ( $\mathbb{Z}_{n}$ is the cyclic group of order $n$ ). $\quad 12$

### 3b 2020 IFoS

Let $G$ be a finite group and let $p$ be a prime. If $p^{m}$ divides order of $G$, then show that $G$ has a subgroup of order $p^{m}$, where $m$ is a positive integer.

### 2b 2016 IFoS

2.(b) Let $\bar{G}$ be a group of order $p q$, where $p$ and $q$ are prime numbers such that $p>q$ and $q \nmid(p-1)$. Then prove that $G$ is cyclic.

### 1a 2015 IFoS

Q1. (a) If in a group $G$ there is an element $a$ of order 360 , what is the order of $a^{220}$ ? Show that if $G$ is a cyclic group of order $\mathrm{n}$ and mivides $\mathrm{n}$, then $G$ has a subgroup of order $m$.

### 3b 2011 IFoS

(b) Let $G$ be a group of order $2 p, p$ prime. Show that either $G$ is cyclic or $G$ is generated by $\{a, b\}$ with relations $a^{p}=e=b^{2}$ and $b a b=a^{-1}$.

## Normal Subgroups

## Homomorphism

### 2a 2019

If $G$ and $H$ are finite groups whose orders are relatively prime, then prove that there is only one homomorphism from $G$ to $H$, the trivial one.

### 2a 2018

Show that the quotient group of $(\mathbb{R},+)$ modulo $\mathbb{Z}$ is isomorphic to the multiplicative group of complex numbers on the unit circle in the complex plane. Here $\mathbb{R}$ is the set of real numbers and $\mathbb{Z}$ is the set of integers.


### 2a 2019

If $G$ and $H$ are finite groups whose orders are relatively prime, then prove that there is only one homomorphism from $G$ to $H$, the trivial one.

### 2a 2018

Show that the quotient group of $(\mathbb{R},+)$ modulo $\mathbb{Z}$ is isomorphic to the multiplicative group of complex numbers on the unit circle in the complex plane. Here $\mathbb{R}$ is the set of real numbers and $\mathbb{Z}$ is the set of integers.


### 3a 2017

Show that the groups $\mathbb{Z}_{5} \times \mathbb{Z}_{7}$ and $\mathbb{Z}_{35}$ are isomorphic.


### 2a 2010

Let $\left(\mathbb{R}^{*}\right.$, $)$ be the multiplicative group of nonzero reals and $(G L(n, \mathbb{R}), X)$ be the multiplicative group of $n \times n$ non-singular' real matrices. Show that the quotient group $G L(n, \mathbb{R}) / S L(n, \mathbb{R})$ and $\left(\mathbb{R}^{*}, \cdot\right)$ are isomorphic where

$S L(n, \mathbb{I})=\{A \in G L(n, \mathbb{I R}) / \operatorname{det} A=1\}$.

What is the centre of $G L(n$, IR) ?


### 1a 2009

If $\mathbb{R}$ is the set of real numbers and $\mathbb{R}_{+}$is the set of positive real numbers, show that $\mathbb{R}$ under addition $(\mathbb{R},+)$ and $\mathbb{R}$, under multiplication $\left(\mathbb{R}_{+}, \cdot\right)$ are isomorphic. Similarly if $\mathbb{Q}$ is the set of rational numbers and $Q_{+}$the set of positive rational numbers, are $(\mathbb{Q},+)$ and $\left(\mathbb{Q}_{+}, \cdot\right)$ isomorphric? Justify your answer. $4+8=12$


### 2a 2018 IFoS

Find all the homomorphisms from the group $(\mathbb{Z},+)$ to $\left(\mathbb{Z}_{4},+\right)$.


### 2a 2011 IFoS

Let $G$ be the group of non-zero complex numbers under multiplication, and let $N$ be the set of complex numbers of absolute value 1 . Show that $G / N$ is isomorphic to the group of all positive real numbers under multiplication.

### 2b 2010 IFoS

Prove or disprove that $(\mathbb{R},+)$ and $\left(\mathbb{R}^{+}, \cdot\right)$ are isomorphic groups where $\mathbb{R}^{+}$ denotes the set of all positive real numbers.


## Permutation Groups

