## Paper 1 SECTION A

### Q1.

(a) Prove that any set of $\mathrm{n}$ linearly independent vectors in a vector space $\mathrm{V}$ of dimension $\mathrm{n}$ constitutes a basis for $\mathrm{V}$.

(b) Let $\mathrm{T}: \mathbb{R}^{2} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{3}$ be a linear transformation such that $\mathrm{T}\left(\begin{array}{l}1 \\ 0\end{array}\right)=\left(\begin{array}{l}1 \\ 2 \\ 3\end{array}\right)$ and $\mathrm{T}\left(\begin{array}{l}1 \\ 1\end{array}\right)=\left(\begin{array}{r}-3 \\ 2 \\ 8\end{array}\right)$. Find $\mathrm{T}\left(\begin{array}{l}2 \\ 4\end{array}\right)$

(c) Evaluate $\lim _{x \rightarrow \infty}\left(e^{x}+x\right)^{\frac{1}{x}}$

(d) Examine the convergence of $\int_{0}^{2} \frac{d x}{\left(2 x-x^{2}\right)}$. 

(e) A variable plane passes through a fixed point (a, b, c) and meets the axes at points A, B and $\mathrm{C}$ respectively. Find the locus of the centre of the sphere passing through the points $\mathrm{O}, \mathrm{A}, \mathrm{B}$ and $\mathrm{C}, \mathrm{O}$ being the origin.

### Q2.

(a) Find all solutions to the following system of equations by row-reduced method :

$$
\begin{aligned}
& x_{1}+2 x_{2}-x_{3}=2 \\
& 2 x_{1}+3 x_{2}+5 x_{3}=5 \\
& -x_{1}-3 x_{2}+8 x_{3}=-1
\end{aligned}
$$

(b)A wire of length $l$ is cut into two parts which are bent in the form of a square and a circle respectively. Using Lagrange's method of undetermined multipliers, find the least value of the sum of the areas so formed.

(c) If $P, Q, R ; P^{\prime}, Q^{\prime}, R^{\prime}$ are feet of the six normals drawn from a point to the ellipsoid $\frac{x^{2}}{a^{2}}+\frac{y^{2}}{b^{2}}+\frac{z^{2}}{c^{2}}=1$, and the plane $P Q R$ is represented by $l x+m y+n z=p$, show that the plane $\mathrm{P}^{\prime} \mathrm{Q}^{\prime} \mathrm{R}^{\prime}$ is given by $\frac{x}{a^{2} l}+\frac{y}{b^{2} m}+\frac{z}{c^{2} n}+\frac{1}{p}=0$ 



### Q3. 

(a)

Let the set $\left.P=\left\{\begin{array}{l}x \\ y \\ z\end{array}\right) \mid \begin{array}{c}x-y-z=0 \text { and } \\ 2 x-y+z=0\end{array}\right\}$

be the collection of vectors of a vector space $\mathbb{R}^{3}(\mathbb{R})$. Then

(i) prove that $P$ is a subspace of $\mathbb{R}^{3}$.

(ii) find a basis and dimension of $\mathrm{P}$. 

(b) 

Use double integration to calculate the area common to the circle $\mathrm{x}^{2}+\mathrm{y}^{2}=4$ and the parabola $\mathrm{y}^{2}=3 \mathrm{x}$.

(c) 

Find the equation of the sphere of smallest possible radius which touches the straight lines : $\frac{x-3}{3}=\frac{y-8}{-1}=\frac{z-3}{1}$ and

$$
\frac{x+3}{-3}=\frac{y+7}{2}=\frac{z-6}{4}
$$

### Q4. 

(a) Find a linear map $\mathrm{T}: \mathbb{R}^{2} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{2}$ which rotates each vector of $\mathbb{R}^{2}$ by an angle $\theta$. Also, prove that for $\theta=\frac{\pi}{2}, \mathrm{~T}$ has no eigenvalue in $\mathbb{R}$ 

(b) Trace the curve $y^{2} x^{2}=x^{2}-a^{2}$, where $a$ is a real constant.

(c) If the plane $u x+v y+w z=0$ cuts the cone $a x^{2}+b y^{2}+c z^{2}=0$ in perpendicular generators, then prove that

$(b+c) u^{2}+(c+a) v^{2}+(a+b) w^{2}=0$

## Paper 1 SECTION B

### Q5. 

(a) Show that the general solution of the differential equation $\frac{d y}{d x}+P y=Q$ can be written in the form $y=\frac{Q}{P}-e^{-\int P d x}\left\{C+\int e^{\int P d x} d\left(\frac{Q}{P}\right)\right\}$, where $\mathrm{P}, \mathrm{Q}$ are non-zero functions of $\mathrm{x}$ and $\mathrm{C}$, an arbitrary constant.

(b) Show that the orthogonal trajectories of the system of parabolas : $\mathrm{x}^{2}=4 \mathrm{a}(\mathrm{y}+\mathrm{a})$ belong to the same system.

(c) A body of weight $w$ rests on a rough inclined plane of inclination $\theta$, the coefficient of friction, $\mu$, being greater than $\tan \theta$. Find the work done in slowly dragging the body a distance 'b' up the plane and then dragging it back to the starting point, the applied force being in each case parallel to the plane.

(d) A projectile is fired from a point $\mathrm{O}$ with velocity $\sqrt{2 g h}$ and hits a tangent at the point $\mathrm{P}(\mathrm{x}, \mathrm{y})$ in the plane, the axes $\mathrm{OX}$ and $\mathrm{OY}$ being horizontal and vertically downward lines through the point $O$, respectively. Show that if the two possible directions of projection be at right angles, then $\mathrm{x}^{2}=2$ hy and then one of the possible directions of projection bisects the angle POX. 

(e) Show that $\vec{A}=\left(6 x y+z^{3}\right) \hat{i}+\left(3 x^{2}-z\right) \hat{j}+\left(3 x z^{2}-y\right) \hat{k}$ is irrotational. Also find $\phi$ such that $\vec{A}=\nabla \phi$.

### Q6. 

(a) A cable of weight w per unit length and length $2 l$ hangs from two points $\mathrm{P}$ and $\mathrm{Q}$ in the same horizontal line. Show that the span of the cable is $2 l\left(1-\frac{2 \mathrm{~h}^{2}}{3 l^{2}}\right)$, where $\mathrm{h}$ is the sag in the middle of the tightly stretched position.

(b) Solve the following differential equation by using the method of variation of parameters : $\left(x^{2}-1\right) \frac{d^{2} y}{d x^{2}}-2 x \frac{d y}{d x}+2 y=\left(x^{2}-1\right)^{2}$, given that $\mathrm{y}=\mathrm{x}$ is one solution of the reduced equation.

(c) Verify Green's theorem in the plane for $\oint_{C}\left(3 x^{2}-8 y^{2}\right) d x+(4 y-6 x y) d y$ where $C$ is the boundary curve of the region defined by $x=0, y=0$, $x+y=1$

### Q7. 

(a) Verify Stokes' theorem for $\vec{F}=x \hat{i}+z^{2} \hat{j}+y^{2} \hat{k}$ over the plane surface $: x+y+z=1$ lying in the first octant. 


(b) Solve the following initial value problem by using Laplace's transformation $\frac{d^{2} y}{d t^{2}}-3 \frac{d y}{d t}+2 y=h(t)$, where

$$
h(t)=\left\{\begin{array}{cc}
2, & 0<t<4, \\
0, & \mathrm{t}>4,
\end{array} \quad y(0)=0, \mathrm{y}^{\prime}(0)=0\right.
$$

(c) Suppose a cylinder of any cross-section is balanced on another fixed cylinder, the contact of curved surfaces being rough and the common tangent line horizontal. Let $\rho$ and $\rho^{\prime}$ be the radii of curvature of the two cylinders at the point of contact and $h$ be the height of centre of gravity of the upper cylinder above the point of contact. Show that the upper cylinder is balanced in stable equilibrium if $\mathrm{h}<\frac{\rho \rho^{\prime}}{\rho+\rho^{\prime}}$.

### Q8. 

(a) (i) Find the general and singular solutions of the differential equation : $\left(x^{2}-a^{2}\right) p^{2}-2 x y p+y^{2}+a^{2}=0$, where $p=\frac{d y}{d x}$. Also give the geometric relation between the general and singular solutions.

(ii) Solve the following differential equation :

$$
(3 x+2)^{2} \frac{d^{2} y}{d x^{2}}+5(3 x+2) \frac{d y}{d x}-3 y=x^{2}+x+1
$$

(b) $\mathrm{A}$ chain of $\mathrm{n}$ equal uniform rods is smoothly jointed together and suspended from its one end $A_{1}$. A horizontal force $\overrightarrow{\mathrm{P}}$ is applied to the other end $A_{n+1}$ of the chain. Find the inclinations of the rods to the downward vertical line in the equilibrium configuration.

(c) Using Gauss' divergence theorem, evaluate $\iint_{S} \vec{F} \cdot \vec{n} d S$, where $\vec{F}=x \hat{i}-y \hat{j}+\left(z^{2}-1\right) \hat{k}$ and $S$ is the cylinder formed by the surfaces $z=0, z=1, x^{2}+y^{2}=4$
